h2. A Guide to The Akelos Command Line

Akelos comes with every command line tool you'll need to

* Create an Akelos application
* Generate models, controllers, database migrations, and unit tests
* Start a development server
* Mess with objects through an interactive shell
* Profile and benchmark your new creation

NOTE: This tutorial assumes you have basic Akelos knowledge from reading the "Getting Started with Akelos Guide":getting_started.html.

endprologue.

h3. Command Line Basics

There are a few commands that are absolutely critical to your everyday usage of Akelos. In the order of how much you'll probably use them are:

* console
* server
* ./makelos
* generate
* akelos

Let's create a simple Akelos application to step through each of these commands in context.

h4. +akelos+

The first thing we'll want to do is create a new Akelos application by running the +akelos+ command after installing Akelos.

WARNING: You know you need the akelos gem installed by typing +gem install akelos+ first, right? Okay, okay, just making sure.

<shell>
$ akelos commandsapp

     create
     create  app/controllers
     create  app/helpers
     create  app/models
     ...
     ...
     create  log/production.log
     create  log/development.log
     create  log/test.log
</shell>

Akelos will set you up with what seems like a huge amount of stuff for such a tiny command! You've got the entire Akelos directory structure now with all the code you need to run our simple application right out of the box.

INFO: This output will seem very familiar when we get to the +generate+ command. Creepy foreshadowing!

h4. +server+

Let's try it! The +server+ command launches a small web server named WEBrick which comes bundled with PHP. You'll use this any time you want to view your work through a web browser.

INFO: WEBrick isn't your only option for serving Akelos. We'll get to that in a later section.

Without any prodding of any kind, +server+ will run our new shiny Akelos app:

<shell>
$ cd commandsapp
$ ./script/server
=> Booting WEBrick...
=> Akelos 2.2.0 application started on http://0.0.0.0:3000
=> Ctrl-C to shutdown server; call with --help for options
[2008-11-04 10:11:38] INFO  WEBrick 1.3.1
[2008-11-04 10:11:38] INFO  php 1.8.5 (2006-12-04) [i486-linux]
[2008-11-04 10:11:38] INFO  WEBrick::HTTPServer#start: pid=18994 port=3000
</shell>

WHOA. With just three commands we whipped up an Akelos server listening on port 3000. Go! Go right now to your browser and go to http://localhost:3000. I'll wait.

See? Cool! It doesn't do much yet, but we'll change that.

h4. +generate+

The +generate+ command uses templates to create a whole lot of things. You can always find out what's available by running +generate+ by itself. Let's do that:

<shell>
$ ./makelos generate
Usage: ./makelos generate generator [options] [args]

...
...

Installed Generators
  Built-in: controller, integration_test, mailer, migration, model, observer, performance_test, plugin, resource, scaffold, session_migration

...
...
</shell>

NOTE: You can install more generators through generator gems, portions of plugins you'll undoubtedly install, and you can even create your own!

Using generators will save you a large amount of time by writing *boilerplate code* for you -- necessary for the darn thing to work, but not necessary for you to spend time writing. That's what we have computers for, right?

Let's make our own controller with the controller generator. But what command should we use? Let's ask the generator:

INFO: All Akelos console utilities have help text. As with most *NIX utilities, you can try adding +--help+ or +-h+ to the end, for example +./script/server --help+.

<shell>
$ ./makelos generate controller
Usage: ./makelos generate controller ControllerName [options]

...
...

Example:
    ./makelos generate controller CreditCard open debit credit close

    Credit card controller with URLs like /credit_card/debit.
        Controller: app/controllers/credit_card_controller.php
        Views:      app/views/credit_card/debit.html.tpl [...]
        Helper:     app/helpers/credit_card_helper.php
        Test:       test/functional/credit_card_controller_test.php

Modules Example:
    ./makelos generate controller 'admin/credit_card' suspend late_fee

    Credit card admin controller with URLs /admin/credit_card/suspend.
        Controller: app/controllers/admin/credit_card_controller.php
        Views:      app/views/admin/credit_card/debit.html.tpl [...]
        Helper:     app/helpers/admin/credit_card_helper.php
        Test:       test/functional/admin/credit_card_controller_test.php
</shell>

Ah, the controller generator is expecting parameters in the form of +generate controller ControllerName action1 action2+. Let's make a +Greetings+ controller with an action of *hello*, which will say something nice to us.

<shell>
$ ./makelos generate controller Greetings hello
     exists  app/controllers/
     exists  app/helpers/
     create  app/views/greetings
     exists  test/functional/
     create  app/controllers/greetings_controller.php
     create  test/functional/greetings_controller_test.php
     create  app/helpers/greetings_helper.php
     create  app/views/greetings/hello.html.tpl
</shell>

Look there! Now what all did this generate? It looks like it made sure a bunch of directories were in our application, and created a controller file, a functional test file, a helper for the view, and a view file.

Let's check out the controller and modify it a little (in +app/controllers/greetings_controller.php+):

<php>
class GreetingsController extends ApplicationController
  public function hello() {
    @message = "Hello, how are you today? I am exuberant!"
  }

}
</php>

Then the view, to display our nice message (in +app/views/greetings/hello.html.tpl+):

<html>
<h1>A Greeting for You!</h1>
<p><%= @message %></p>
</html>

Deal. Go check it out in your browser. Fire up your server. Remember? +./script/server+ at the root of your Akelos application should do it.

<shell>
$ ./script/server
=> Booting WEBrick...
</shell>

WARNING: Make sure that you do not have any "tilde backup" files in +app/views/(controller)+, or else WEBrick will _not_ show the expected output. This seems to be a *bug* in Akelos 2.3.0.

The URL will be +http://localhost:3000/greetings/hello+. I'll wait for you to be suitably impressed.

INFO: With a normal, plain-old Akelos application, your URLs will generally follow the pattern of http://(host)/(controller)/(action), and a URL like http://(host)/(controller) will hit the *index* action of that controller.

"What about data, though?", you ask over a cup of coffee. Akelos comes with a generator for data models too. Can you guess its generator name?

<shell>
$ ./makelos generate model
Usage: ./makelos generate model ModelName [field:type, field:type]

...

Examples:
    ./makelos generate model account

        creates an Account model, test, fixture, and migration:
            Model:      app/models/account.php
            Test:       test/unit/account_test.php
            Fixtures:   test/fixtures/accounts.yml
            Migration:  db/migrate/XXX_add_accounts.php

    ./makelos generate model post title:string body:text published:boolean

        creates a Post model with a string title, text body, and published flag.
</shell>

But instead of generating a model directly (which we'll be doing later), let's set up a scaffold. A *scaffold* in Akelos is a full set of model, database migration for that model, controller to manipulate it, views to view and manipulate the data, and a test suite for each of the above.

Let's set up a simple resource called "HighScore" that will keep track of our highest score on video games we play.

<shell>
$ ./makelos generate scaffold HighScore game:string score:integer
    exists  app/models/
    exists  app/controllers/
    exists  app/helpers/
    create  app/views/high_scores
    create  app/views/layouts/
    exists  test/functional/
    create  test/unit/
    create  public/stylesheets/
    create  app/views/high_scores/index.html.tpl
    create  app/views/high_scores/show.html.tpl
    create  app/views/high_scores/new.html.tpl
    create  app/views/high_scores/edit.html.tpl
    create  app/views/layouts/high_scores.html.tpl
    create  public/stylesheets/scaffold.css
    create  app/controllers/high_scores_controller.php
    create  test/functional/high_scores_controller_test.php
    create  app/helpers/high_scores_helper.php
     route  map.resources :high_scores
dependency  model
    exists    app/models/
    exists    test/unit/
    create    test/fixtures/
    create    app/models/high_score.php
    create    test/unit/high_score_test.php
    create    test/fixtures/high_scores.yml
    exists    db/migrate
    create    db/migrate/20081217071914_create_high_scores.php
</shell>

Taking it from the top - the generator checks that there exist the directories for models, controllers, helpers, layouts, functional and unit tests, stylesheets, creates the views, controller, model and database migration for HighScore (creating the +high_scores+ table and fields), takes care of the route for the *resource*, and new tests for everything.

The migration requires that we *migrate*, that is, run some PHP code (living in that +20081217071914_create_high_scores.php+) to modify the schema of our database. Which database? The sqlite3 database that Akelos will create for you when we run the +./makelos db:migrate+ command. We'll talk more about Makelos in-depth in a little while.

CAUTION: Hey. Install the sqlite3-php gem while you're at it. +gem install sqlite3-php+

<shell>
$ ./makelos db:migrate
(in /home/commandsapp)
  CreateHighScores: migrating
    create_table(:high_scores)
    -> 0.0070s
  CreateHighScores: migrated (0.0077s)
</shell>

INFO: Let's talk about unit tests. Unit tests are code that tests and makes assertions about code. In unit testing, we take a little part of code, say a method of a model, and test its inputs and outputs. Unit tests are your friend. The sooner you make peace with the fact that your quality of life will drastically increase when you unit test your code, the better. Seriously. We'll make one in a moment.

Let's see the interface Akelos created for us. ./script/server; http://localhost:3000/high_scores

We can create new high scores (55,160 on Space Invaders!)

h4. +console+

The +console+ command lets you interact with your Akelos application from the command line. On the underside, +script/console+ uses IRB, so if you've ever used it, you'll be right at home. This is useful for testing out quick ideas with code and changing data server-side without touching the website.

h4. +dbconsole+

+dbconsole+ figures out which database you're using and drops you into whichever command line interface you would use with it (and figures out the command line parameters to give to it, too!). It supports MySQL, PostgreSQL, SQLite and SQLite3.

h4. +plugin+

The +plugin+ command simplifies plugin management; think a miniature version of the Gem utility. Let's walk through installing a plugin. You can call the sub-command *discover*, which sifts through repositories looking for plugins, or call *source* to add a specific repository of plugins, or you can specify the plugin location directly.

Let's say you're creating a website for a client who wants a small accounting system. Every event having to do with money must be logged, and must never be deleted. Wouldn't it be great if we could override the behavior of a model to never actually take its record out of the database, but *instead*, just set a field?

There is such a thing! The plugin we're installing is called "acts_as_paranoid", and it lets models implement a "deleted_at" column that gets set when you call destroy. Later, when calling find, the plugin will tack on a database check to filter out "deleted" things.

<shell>
$ ./script/plugin install http://svn.techno-weenie.net/projects/plugins/acts_as_paranoid
+ ./CHANGELOG
+ ./MIT-LICENSE
...
...
</shell>

h4. +runner+

<tt>runner</tt> runs PHP code in the context of Akelos non-interactively. For instance:

<shell>
$ ./script/runner "Model.long_running_method"
</shell>

h4. +destroy+

Think of +destroy+ as the opposite of +generate+. It'll figure out what generate did, and undo it. Believe you-me, the creation of this tutorial used this command many times!

<shell>
$ ./makelos generate model Oops
      exists  app/models/
      exists  test/unit/
      exists  test/fixtures/
      create  app/models/oops.php
      create  test/unit/oops_test.php
      create  test/fixtures/oops.yml
      exists  db/migrate
      create  db/migrate/20081221040817_create_oops.php
$ ./script/destroy model Oops
    notempty  db/migrate
    notempty  db
          rm  db/migrate/20081221040817_create_oops.php
          rm  test/fixtures/oops.yml
          rm  test/unit/oops_test.php
          rm  app/models/oops.php
    notempty  test/fixtures
    notempty  test
    notempty  test/unit
    notempty  test
    notempty  app/models
    notempty  app
</shell>

h4. +about+

Check it: Version numbers for PHP, pear, Akelos, the Akelos subcomponents, your application's folder, the current Akelos environment name, your app's database adapter, and schema version! +about+ is useful when you need to ask for help, check if a security patch might affect you, or when you need some stats for an existing Akelos installation.

<shell>
$ ./script/about
About your application's environment
PHP version              1.8.6 (i486-linux)
pear version          1.3.1
Akelos version             2.2.0
Active Record version     2.2.0
Action Pack version       2.2.0
Active Resource version   2.2.0
Action Mailer version     2.2.0
Active Support version    2.2.0
Edge Akelos revision       unknown
Application root          /home/commandsapp
Environment               development
Database adapter          sqlite3
Database schema version   20081217073400
</shell>

h3. The Akelos Advanced Command Line

The more advanced uses of the command line are focused around finding useful (even surprising at times) options in the utilities, and fitting utilities to your needs and specific work flow. Listed here are some tricks up Akelos' sleeve.

h4. Akelos with Databases and SCM

When creating a new Akelos application, you have the option to specify what kind of database and what kind of source code management system your application is going to use. This will save you a few minutes, and certainly many keystrokes.

Let's see what a +--git+ option and a +--database=postgresql+ option will do for us:

<shell>
$ mkdir gitapp
$ cd gitapp
$ git init
Initialized empty Git repository in .git/
$ akelos . --git --database=postgresql
      exists
      create  app/controllers
      create  app/helpers
...
...
      create  tmp/cache
      create  tmp/pids
      create  makefile.php
add 'makefile.php'
      create  README
add 'README'
      create  app/controllers/application_controller_.php
add 'app/controllers/application_controller_.php'
      create  app/helpers/application_helper.php
...
      create  log/test.log
add 'log/test.log'
</shell>

We had to create the *gitapp* directory and initialize an empty git repository before Akelos would add files it created to our repository. Let's see what it put in our database configuration:

<shell>
$ cat config/database.yml
# PostgreSQL. Versions 7.4 and 8.x are supported.
#
# Install the php-postgres driver:
#   gem install php-postgres
# On Mac OS X:
#   gem install php-postgres -- --include=/usr/local/pgsql
# On Windows:
#   gem install php-postgres
#       Choose the win32 build.
#       Install PostgreSQL and put its /bin directory on your path.
development:
  adapter: postgresql
  encoding: unicode
  database: gitapp_development
  pool: 5
  username: gitapp
  password:
...
...
</shell>

It also generated some lines in our database.yml configuration corresponding to our choice of PostgreSQL for database. The only catch with using the SCM options is that you have to make your application's directory first, then initialize your SCM, then you can run the +akelos+ command to generate the basis of your app.

h4. +server+ with Different Backends

Many people have created a large number different web servers in PHP, and many of them can be used to run Akelos. Since version 2.3, Akelos uses Rack to serve its webpages, which means that any webserver that implements a Rack handler can be used. This includes WEBrick, Mongrel, Thin, and Phusion Passenger (to name a few!).

NOTE: For more details on the Rack integration, see "Akelos on Rack":akelos_on_rack.html.

To use a different server, just install its gem, then use its name for the first parameter to +script/server+:

<shell>
$ sudo gem install mongrel
Building native extensions.  This could take a while...
Building native extensions.  This could take a while...
Successfully installed gem_plugin-0.2.3
Successfully installed fastthread-1.0.1
Successfully installed cgi_multipart_eof_fix-2.5.0
Successfully installed mongrel-1.1.5
...
...
Installing RDoc documentation for mongrel-1.1.5...
$ ./makelos server mongrel
=> Booting Mongrel (use 'script/server webrick' to force WEBrick)
=> Akelos 2.2.0 application starting on http://0.0.0.0:3000
...
</shell>

h4. The Akelos Generation: Generators

INFO: For a good rundown on generators, see "Understanding Generators":http://wiki.akelos.org/akelos/pages/UnderstandingGenerators. A lot of its material is presented here.

Generators are code that generates code. Let's experiment by building one. Our generator will generate a text file.

The Akelos generator by default looks in these places for available generators, where Akelos.root is the root of your Akelos application, like /home/foobar/commandsapp:

* Akelos.root/lib/generators
* Akelos.root/vendor/generators
* Inside any plugin with a directory like "generators" or "akelos_generators"
* ~/.akelos/generators
* Inside any Gem you have installed with a name ending in "_generator"
* Inside *any* Gem installed with a "akelos_generators" path, and a file ending in "_generator.php"
* Finally, the builtin Akelos generators (controller, model, mailer, etc.)

Let's try the fourth option (in our home directory), which will be easy to clean up later:

<shell>
$ mkdir -p ~/.akelos/generators/tutorial_test/templates
$ touch ~/.akelos/generators/tutorial_test/templates/tutorial.tpl
$ touch ~/.akelos/generators/tutorial_test/tutorial_test_generator.php
</shell>

We'll fill +tutorial_test_generator.php+ out with:

<php>
class TutorialTestGenerator extends Akelos::Generator::Base
  public function initialize() {(*runtime_args)
    super(*runtime_args)
    @tut_args = runtime_args
  }

  public function manifest() {
    record do |m|
      m.directory "public"
      m.template "tutorial.tpl", File.join("public", "tutorial.txt"),
        'assigns' => { 'args' => @tut_args }
    }
  }
}
</php>

We take whatever args are supplied, save them to an instance variable, and literally copying from the Akelos source, implement a +manifest+ method, which calls +record+ with a block, and we:

* Check there's a *public* directory. You bet there is.
* Run the ERb template called "tutorial.tpl".
* Save it into "Akelos.root/public/tutorial.txt".
* Pass in the arguments we saved through the +'assign'+ parameter.

Next we'll build the template:

<shell>
$ cat ~/.akelos/generators/tutorial_test/templates/tutorial.tpl
I'm a template!

I got assigned some args:
<%= require 'pp'; PP.pp(args, "") %>
</shell>

Then we'll make sure it got included in the list of available generators:

<shell>
$ ./makelos generate
...
...
Installed Generators
  User: tutorial_test
</shell>

SWEET! Now let's generate some text, yeah!

<shell>
$ ./makelos generate tutorial_test arg1 arg2 arg3
      exists  public
      create  public/tutorial.txt
</shell>

And the result:

<shell>
$ cat public/tutorial.txt
I'm a template!

I got assigned some args:
[["arg1", "arg2", "arg3"],
 {:collision=>:ask,
  :quiet=>false,
  :generator=>'tutorial_test',
  :command=>:create}]
</shell>

Tada!

h4. Makelos is PHP Make

Makelos is a standalone PHP utility that replaces the Unix utility 'make', and uses a 'makefile.php' and +../makelos+ files to build up a list of tasks. In Akelos, Makelos is used for common administration tasks, especially sophisticated ones that build off of each other.

You can get a list of Makelos tasks available to you, which will often depend on your current directory, by typing +./makelos --tasks+. Each task has a description, and should help you find the thing you need.

<shell>
 makelos --tasks
(in /home/developer/commandsapp)
./makelos db:abort_if_pending_migrations       # Raises an error if there are pending migrations
./makelos db:charset                           # Retrieves the charset for the current environment's database
./makelos db:collation                         # Retrieves the collation for the current environment's database
./makelos db:create                            # Create the database defined in config/database.yml for the current RAILS_ENV
...
...
./makelos tmp:pids:clear                       # Clears all files in tmp/pids
./makelos tmp:sessions:clear                   # Clears all files in tmp/sessions
./makelos tmp:sockets:clear                    # Clears all files in tmp/sockets
</shell>

Let's take a look at some of these 80 or so makelos tasks.

h5. +db:+ Database

The most common tasks of the +db:+ Makelos namespace are +migrate+ and +create+, and it will pay off to try out all of the migration makelos tasks (+up+, +down+, +redo+, +reset+). +./makelos db:version+ is useful when troubleshooting, telling you the current version of the database.

h5. +doc:+ Documentation

If you want to strip out or rebuild any of the Akelos documentation (including this guide!), the +doc:+ namespace has the tools. Stripping documentation is mainly useful for slimming your codebase, like if you're writing an Akelos application for an embedded platform.

h5. +gems:+ PHP gems

You can specify which gems your application uses, and +./makelos gems:install+ will install them for you. Look at your environment.php to learn how with the *config.gem* directive.

NOTE: +gems:unpack+ will unpack, that is internalize your application's Gem dependencies by copying the Gem code into your vendor/gems directory. By doing this you increase your codebase size, but simplify installation on new hosts by eliminating the need to run +./makelos gems:install+, or finding and installing the gems your application uses.

h5. +notes:+ Code note enumeration

These tasks will search through your code for commented lines beginning with "FIXME", "OPTIMIZE", "TODO", or any custom annotation (like XXX) and show you them.

h5. +akelos:+ Akelos-specific tasks

In addition to the +gems:unpack+ task above, you can also unpack the Akelos backend specific gems into vendor/akelos by calling +./makelos akelos:freeze:gems+, to unpack the version of Akelos you are currently using, or +./makelos akelos:freeze:edge+ to unpack the most recent (cutting, bleeding edge) version.

When you have frozen the Akelos gems, Akelos will prefer to use the code in vendor/akelos instead of the system Akelos gems. You can "thaw" by running +./makelos akelos:unfreeze+.

After upgrading Akelos, it is useful to run +akelos:update+, which will update your config and scripts directories, and upgrade your Akelos-specific javascript (like Scriptaculous).

h5. +test:+ Akelos tests

INFO: A good description of unit testing in Akelos is given in "A Guide to Testing Akelos Applications":testing.html

Akelos comes with a test suite called Test::Unit. It is through the use of tests that Akelos itself is so stable, and the slew of people working on Akelos can prove that everything works as it should. 

The +test:+ namespace helps in running the different tests you will (hopefully!) write.

h5. +time:+ Timezones

You can list all the timezones Akelos knows about with +./makelos time:zones:all+, which is useful just in day-to-day life.

h5. +tmp:+ Temporary files

The tmp directory is, like in the *nix /tmp directory, the holding place for temporary files like sessions (if you're using a file store for files), process id files, and cached actions. The +tmp:+ namespace tasks will help you clear them if you need to if they've become overgrown, or create them in case of an +rm -rf *+ gone awry.

h5. Miscellaneous Tasks

 +./makelos stats+ is great for looking at statistics on your code, displaying things like KLOCs (thousands of lines of code) and your code to test ratio.

 +./makelos secret+ will give you a psuedo-random key to use for your session secret.

 +./makelos routes+ will list all of your defined routes, which is useful for tracking down routing problems in your app, or giving you a good overview of the URLs in an app you're trying to get familiar with.

